well we can speak now to Margaret Harris
she is from the World Health
Organization she joins us live from
Geneva many thanks for joining the
program as an organization have you ever
seen destruction of Health Facilities on
this scale before as you've seen in
Gaza good evening
malen we are seeing more and more
concerning uh attacks on health actually
around the world we've actually seen it
for instance in Sudan and Ukraine but
certainly the speed the intensity the
complete destruction of a health system
as you said 30 out of 36 hospitals
damaged very very few hospitals left in
uh the strip able to provide even the
most basic Services uh at a time when
you've got millions of people who are
desperately in need of of care because
of not just their physical injuries due
to bombardment but their their infection
there Rising levels of infection due to
overcrowding and also starvation and
malnutrition
685 healthcare workers that have been
killed and injured 902 those are your
numbers doesn't that sound incredibly
High it is it is and this is it is also
shocking that since we began documenting
attacks on health the numbers have
become so have have ra risen so rapidly
it's very very clear in international
humanitarian law and this was one of the
first of the agreements around the rules
of war that Health Care must be neutral
must be protected because Health Care is
something for everyone doesn't matter
whether you're fighting or not Health
Care is something that all societies
need it's a basic human right do you
think Israel is deliberately destroying
gaza's health system and infrastructure
so that is really something for the
analysts what we are simply seeing is
that there is destruction and this is
making it harder and harder for those
who are simply providing trying to
provide life-saving care to a large
population of people not only the people
who are injured but people who've got
ongoing illness we're now seeing so many
people who are no longer getting their
cancer treatment who are no longer
getting their diabetes treatment who are
dying of things that they would normally
be able to overcome or or who would be
able to live a normal life but they no
longer have access to the care that's a
basic human R and it's the healthcare
workers as well isn't it you've released
a report today saying that health
workers are dealing themselves with
starvation and malnutrition which is
making it incredibly hard for them to do
their jobs tell us more about your
findings they're desperately hungry and
hungry and lacking water I me most
people only
have this much a day that uh and that's
everybody and just imagine you are
working incredibly hard incredibly
physically hard running from Patient to
Patient dealing with things that you've
got to be mentally alert for but also
physically alert for and you have very
very little food now we are mounting
missions as often as we are permitted uh
and when we come one of the things that
we're asked for first by the healthare
workers is food and we do our best to
bring some we're also increasingly
bringing um nutritional supplements for
children uh refeeding food because that
is now the great need starvation is
stalking every doorway in Gaza when was
the last time who was able to distribute
Fuel and other life-saving health
supplies to Major hospitals in Northern
Gaza we have regular missions and as
said it is dependent on them being
facilitated or agreed to we have been uh
the most recent I've got details of was
just a couple of days ago and we were
able to get to the Pediatric Hospital
prior to the hostilities around alifa we
were able to get to that hospital last
week and it was beginning to get off its
knees beginning to provide at least
basic services but I'm sadly we are now
seeing because of the hostil fa ities
there that that that that has been
interrupted and as I said and what we're
doing much more in the north now is
looking at how we can set up nutritional
stabilization centers for the many many
children but also adults who are now at
a serious stage of severe acute
malnutrition we have been struggling to
communicate with doctors and healthcare
workers in Northern Gaza we have an
ongoing situ ation at shifa hospital
what is your understanding of the level
of health care now available in the
north it's minimal we know that there
there were I mean before the hostilities
around our Shea six hospitals that were
doing what they could but most of them
lack Fuel and whenever we go to the
north we one of the things we bring is
fuel so that they can get their
generators going in some hospitals we
have to rep the generator or bring a new
generator because that's been destroyed
um it's a lot of the staff The
Specialist staff you need remember the
injuries they're seeing are horrific
Burns and blast injuries and you need to
be a very experienced uh and skilled
surgeon to be able to deal with that so
one of the other problems is the staff
themselves don't have those skills and
don't have the support of the experts
because they've either left or died or
um they have been
displaced
so they do their best they're doing
their best but maintaining just basic
hygiene is a
struggle Margaret Harris from the World
Health Organization speaking to us there
from Geneva thank you so much for your
time thank you for having me marene